I'm sorry, because some of this may be stuff we want, talking to William Sapphire.
I'm sorry, you said liberals?
You were just chatting about the various hats that you wear.
Well, liberals like me for my language column, and conservatives like me for my political column, and spooks like my spy novel.
And so I have killed a different audience.
Well, this is now your third novel, I believe.
Well, the last one, Freedom, was, you know, it took me eight years, and it was a great doorstop, as well as a, and it's got good, heavy notes in the back, because I hated the idea of doing a historical novel without knowing what the sources were.
Which is unusual.
I love.
what we call the apparatus of tobacco.
I love to know, and I read notes very, very carefully.
I'm a fan of, my book is, I think, 150 pages of the stuff.
But that was unusual, wasn't it?
You might just expand on that if you would.
Yeah, I think the whole idea of historical novels will be enhanced by leveling with the reader about what's true and what's not.
A newspaper man can't give away his sources for alive and kicking, but a historical novelist can certainly help the reader along and just tell him, I made up this character, or this is absolutely based on such and such a letter.
And there is a class of reader who really digs that.
Herman Wolfe does that, too.
He does, yeah.
Of course, you didn't feel the responsibility of building his back in sleep was spied, because this is largely an invention.
However, you are drawing from inside knowledge, I gather.
Right.
I did have a long session in the 70s with James Jesus Angleton.
the great counter-spot for the CIA, who was fired for being too zealous about keeping out the molds.
You mentioned him on your education.
Right.
And he was an orchid gatherer and raisin.
A orchid gatherer, I'm sorry?
No, he was an orchid cultivator.
Orchids was his horticultural hobby, and I asked him why, and he explained the deceptiveness of orchids, how insects were confused by orchids that dissembled.
And he also told me the story of the fireflies and the assassination beetles, where even insects practiced deception on each other.
That got me into an interest in epistemology, the study of knowledge, and the limitations of knowledge and the intrusions on knowledge of deception.
So this is a novel about deception.
Indeed.
This is the concept of the sleepers.
Oh, let me, before we get into that, I hope you don't mind my jumping around.
I transcribe these tapes and they make sense when I have them.
Were you working on this prior to the arrest of Ames?
Um, let's see.
Because a mole certainly is, we certainly have a mole in here.
I was noodling around the idea of a sleeper.
A sleeper is not a mole.
I understand, but there is also a mole.
Right.
A mole is a second, actually, there are two moles here.
And by the way, Dick Helms told me that, uh,
They never used the word mole back in the 50s and 60s.
They always talked about penetration agents.
And then John Le Carre used the term mole.
Did he invent that word?
Yeah, yeah.
He cooked it up, good figure of speed.
And then the intelligence community seized it, and now it's used.
So life follows art.
But...
The Ames thing came as I was writing this, and certainly had an impact on that about.
It certainly gives a credibility to this whole thing.
Absolutely.
Because maybe Angleton wasn't so crazy.
That was my point.
As Henry Kissinger used to say, even a paranoid has some real enemy.
I forget whether that was, but it used to be paranoid, too, if everybody was out to get you.
Something like that.
But nobody, although he was not very assiduous when it came to the civil liberties of government employees, nobody died on, no American agent died on Angleton's watch as a result of a mole's activity.
So now he's looked back on with a little more respect than he had in two or three years.
Well, there is still, isn't there some speculation that they haven't covered all the penetration agents of the moles?
I think they'll go find another mole before we do.
Yeah.
And, of course, what happens, Chris, and the disinformation concept is wonderful, because even though we have a new government in Russia, these people still have a vested interest, don't they, in protecting sources of information?
They've split their...
KGB into the foreign intelligence branch, which is separate from the KGB now.
And that is actively spying all over the world, particularly here.
And our FBI is tasked to follow them around here and complain of not getting enough money because the Russian effort here is increased.
while the KGB is less effective in Russia, because they've had so many changes at the top.
I did get a chance to go to Lubyanka when I was there a couple times, twice, and visit the prison, or the former prison, and meet the heads as they come and go.
heads as often as they change the name of the book.
But certainly a lot of the verisimilitude was right for my book.
And that's very important to you.
I mean, it goes back to what you were saying earlier about freedom, even though you don't have the textual apparatus at the back of the book.
If you name building, that name, so far as you know, is correct.
Right.
The factual stuff is as factually correct as you can make it.
Is that a fair assumption?
There is one mistake in this book.
Mistake in 10 minutes or?
In my language column, whenever somebody catches me in a mistake, I say, aha, you see, you passed the test.
But this is a real mistake.
I refer to Fort Marcy Park, which is a park overlooking the Potomac.
And it happened to be the park in which Vincent Foster's body was found.
I know.
I used to drive out there when I was a kid.
That's right near the CIA.
That's where you met people when the CIA didn't want you to come in.
They used to provide protection from a naval assault up the Potomac.
Wasn't that the idea?
Wasn't that intended originally?
Yeah.
Fortification guarding Washington from attack.
Guarding Washington from attack by the Confederates.
Right, yeah.
I'm not sure of that, because it was on the Virginia side, and Virginia was... The mistake is I referred to the park being named after McClellan's chief of staff, which is true, Marcy.
who later became his son-in-law, which is also true, but his name is not William Marson, it's Randolph Marson, which I discovered when I drove by there recently and just stopped in.
Did you discover that somebody brought it to your attention?
No, I was passing by.
Is that driving nuts when that happened?
Well, I look at it this way.
It's a book collector.
It means in the next edition, please God, we'll have another printing.
I'll correct it, and that'll make the first edition the real first edition.
My book, if I may digress, has a... Would you like some sparkling water?
I would love some.
Give me a chance to just check.
You go crazy, because I want it to be as right as you can make it.
But that does make an issue point for your book, the fact that you have the
The Christian name of Marcy incorrect in one.
I'm not going to use this advice.
That's all right.
No, I'm not worried about it.
There's a group of people that call themselves the gotcha gang that take a special delight in catching mistakes that I make.
Well, that's... Which is legit.
That's an occupational hazard.
Exactly.
I mean, you run that risk.
And frankly, every time I make a really egregious mistake, it's another column.
Well, have you made many egregious mistakes?
Can I call them?
Yes, but they're all intentional.
There's a great quote that I recall from my undergraduate days back in the 60s, and I don't know the pronouns, but when one thief steals from another, the devil laughs.
Have you heard that?
No, that's a great question.
And I've got to find it.
I'm sure if I go back to my old notebook, so it's a great, great book.
kind of get that sense in here, I mean, disinformation, disinformation.
Well, one of the characters, the KGB chief, says a couple of times in the book, don't trust anything I say.
And, of course, that applies to every character in the book.
And that mirror, I have a scene set in the Hall of Mirrors in Versailles, which is my big symbol of the world of deception.
Talking generally about journalists and bureaucrats and politicians and Washington, there is.
I wrote my master's thesis years ago.
I had a fellowship in Washington, D.C., and the whole essence was the symbiosis that exists between the case study of the Bobby Baker case.
How could Baker go on all those years when nobody in the press knew what he was doing?
Most money he ever made was $19,000 a year.
As aide to Johnson, he was building this huge million dollar motel.
You know, yet the press knew because they depended on him as a symbiotic relationship that exists.
And I think that you kind of exploit that institution.
Do you see that?
Is that still the case in Washington?
Well, my one page of preachiness in the thing is that where the
world's greatest reporter here, Irving Fine, explains to the young woman reporter, television reporter from Latvia.
Vivica.
No, not Vivica.
This is Liana.
The one from Riga.
Great.
And up at Syracuse, where I... That was my college.
I dropped out of Syracuse.
He explains to her the symbiosis.
And
and yet shows that there's a difference in purpose between the world of intelligence and the world of reporting.
Where intelligence, the end product, is kept secret, and in reporting, it's just the opposite.
One group has a need to know, and the other a need to tell.
And they use each other, and in this interplay, whoever
gets the most use out of the other wins.
So you see it more or less as a contest, as a game.
A cooperative contest, yes.
But you said you used the verb wins so that that suggests that they're playing a game.
On the other hand, do you also see, having been in Washington for many years, that reporters will protect sources?
Just as intelligence agents will protect sources.
Because it's bartering information, bartering papers.
And one of the points I'm making here is that journalists often deceive and use half-truths and make things up in order to get information out of sources.
How do you feel about that?
It's a legitimate technique.
If I say to you, I know that you're going to be 65 tomorrow,
in the hope that you'll tell me that you're only 63 or whatever.
All right.
That gets me the information, and it's a trick.
But I mean, but how about actually using deception in your copy?
No, you don't deceive the reader.
Right, okay.
But in the interchange with the subject?
But in trying to serve the reader by getting him the truth, you often use tricky devices.
But have you ever known it will even use as a trial balloon?
Yes.
How do you feel about that?
If it's an interesting trial balloon, then I kind of like it.
And I identify it as such.
Oh, you do?
Sure, why not?
It doesn't cost anything.
If I say such and such a candidate is thinking of doing such and such, the truth is he is thinking about it.
And if it flies, he'll do it.
If it doesn't fly, it won't.
And that's the trouble with a lot of us, is that we don't... Us being journalists?
Yeah.
We don't label what we're doing.
What I do in my column is commentary.
Yeah, but it is labeled by being on the op-ed page, isn't it?
We have a sense of what it is, obviously.
It's not reporting on the First Lady's speech in Beijing.
I mean, just as an example.
Well, I can get away with murder because everybody knows I'm an opinionated reporter.
I'm sorry.
So just as in my novel I can shape the truth,
I can shape my opinions right in front of everybody.
Are you having fun?
Oh, this is great.
Are you writing novels?
Do you write a language column?
Well, I'm like an air controller.
I have two columns of political columns a week coming in like a shuttle.
And then I have once a week a language column, which I can deliver on a Friday or I can deliver on a Monday.
It's a
It's not as hard a deadline.
The first deadline I've got to be... You mean for this Sunday, your absolute deadline is like yesterday?
No, I'm two weeks ahead.
Two weeks ahead.
So I'm right on tight deadline for my political stuff.
All right.
Five o'clock on Wednesday afternoon, I'll file for a Thursday morning.
That's tight.
Yeah.
And I do that twice a week.
So those are my shuttles.
That's the shuttles coming in.
And then the language column, which is a more relaxed deadline.
And then there's the intercontinental aircraft, which is the novel, or the dictionary, whatever I'm working in.
I have the dictionary as a major reference.
I mean, I have my reference books.
The reference book that I did that surprised the hell out of me was Lend Me Your Ears.
Right, that's right.
That's all 60,000 copies.
It's still going strong.
Because as a factual reference, I mean, just to find out that somebody said something and to get them... In context, yeah.
In context, it's really... I have books.
I want 15,000 books in my house, but there are a few that you have in your body for...
That happens to be one of them.
And that other volume of your essay is over here, and that piece of it.
I also, whenever I go into a new city, I mean, I've said this, I've always looked for the second-hand book stories.
They don't have to be antiquarian books.
I prefer even a second-hand book.
I love getting the book for two bucks that's out of print and nobody wants, and I love those kinds of stories.
I mean, you said you went to Syracuse, you dropped out, and I have the factual background.
That was a pretty good piece in the New York Times Magazine six or seven years ago.
I mean, that's all essentially correct factually, isn't that right?
I'm not going to bother revisiting a lot of these things.
But you never attended, I mean, journalism was not your chosen career, was it?
Yes, it was.
Back when I was 19, I went to work for the Herald Tribune, and it was an adventure.
And then I got drafted, and then I went to public relations and politics.
I didn't expect to go back to journalism, because there are so many, so few really great slots as columnists.
A columnist is the coveted good job.
You know what I'm talking about?
And, I mean, nobody wants to be the top editor anymore.
They want to be a columnist.
But at Syracuse, I dropped out.
When was this, by the way?
1959.
That was the class of 51.
I dropped out of 49.
Came back and gave me the commencement address a couple of times.
And then they made me a trustee.
And then I was able to set up a room at the Syracuse Library.
I got a foundation of which I'm on, the Charles Dana Foundation.
to contribute yearly to the upkeep of a room at the Syracuse Library.
And I've donated a portion of my library, mainly the language stuff, the lexicography.
Your papers?
Not my papers.
These are books I've collected.
You know, old dictionaries and old books about language, philology, you know, going way back.
Boy, I hate to give up.
Well, you know, I haven't given it all up.
I've got a 10,000 volume library at home, and a big house, and I got a lot.
But, so I started out with 1,500 that I gave them, and then I was able to set up a, thanks to Dana, an acquisition fund, a small acquisition fund, so we can buy books for that library.
And what we're going to do is make that room into a,
a good working center for students who are interested in language, too.
And I can go up there every now and then and give a seminar and see my old books.
That's great.
You'll enjoy my book, because this is precisely the kind of thing I write about, books going on as pilgrims, you know, from generation to generation.
Oh, I got a call from Alan Stapak at Second Story Books in Washington.
you know, and rock them, saying an institute of linguistics has decided to get rid of its pre-1984 library, because this is right out of room.
And so he said, I've got 80 cartons of books here.
Come on over.
So I went over, and I picked out 15 cartons,
wonderful, you know, runs of dialect notes and quarterly publications of languages, just impossible to find.
And so I picked out 15 cars and shipped them off to Syracuse.
And that's a good feeling.
And one of these days I'll sit down and, you know, go through them.
Sure.
My passion is books on books, anything.
Bibliography or book collecting or library formations.
But so many of the catalogs now have a special section of books on them.
That's right.
They don't even have sales.
I go to all of them.
I can't.
By the way, it doesn't seem that we're talking about the novel.
That's my job, to read it.
I'm more interested in the creation of the novel.
It's my job to read the book.
I'm not going to ask you questions.
that I'm supposed to answer myself.
I'm not worried about whether or not you're plugged enough.
I'll write something right now.
And I don't know if Tom told you, I do have my own syndicate of newspapers.
Yeah, you told me that.
Which I've put together in the last year and a half.
I've perceived a need for a good literary column, and what I've done is target university towns to play.
So I'm in Lawrence, Kansas.
I'm in Eugene, Oregon every week.
My column.
I'm in Knoxville.
I'm in Austin.
That's a good idea.
I'm in Gainesville.
I went up to the three villes, Charlottesville, Gainesville, and Knoxville.
I got them all three.
And Columbus uses me a couple of times when I'm in Salt Lake City every week, and they all give me nice play, quick window.
And what I do is guarantee them a face-to-face interview every week with a major or interesting author like this.
We could do the first novel.
provide the art, and I shoot some color, if you'll let me when I'm done, because some of these papers like colored pictures.
Boston likes color.
Anyway, that's kind of what I do.
I've got 30 papers.
They take me every week.
About 20 take me every week.
But this piece... So how do you get a prop out of it?
I think it's on tape.
We've got to get some good clothes.
By the way, what's your time?
I've got another guy coming at 11.15.
Okay, we've got to forget some time.
Let's get back.
You mentioned that you were, did you do some PR when you were in the service?
You were drafted, you said, when were you in the Army?
1951 to 53, during the Korea War, I was over in Europe.
And then I came back and I became, after I did a stint as a television producer, a flak.
And I was a press agent for about eight years.
I was a public affairs officer on the aircraft carrier Riskeny for three years.
Well, that's where you learn how to twist minds.
Well, you know, I got a medal.
I made two combat cruises over in 69 and 70.
I mean, you really do learn a few things, don't you?
I mean, you learn that an enemy camp, an enemy village is a camp.
It's never a village.
You know what I'm saying?
We bombed an enemy village.
No, you bombed an enemy camp.
It's a very big difference, isn't it?
You didn't run a trail.
You learned a little about manipulation.
You know, these are things that we learn.
But, you know, I have my experience.
Going back to writing fiction, is this an entertainment?
Is this amusement for you?
Are you trying to be instructive at all?
Well, in two of my novels, in full disclosure here, I draw on my experience as a journalist.
and use it and have fun with it.
In Full Disclosure, which was in the 70s, it was about the president going blind and trying to knock him out of the presidency under the 25th Amendment.
And it was about moral blindness in positions of power.
And so I drew on my White House experience there.
And it was a way of telling the truth, really, without being burdened by facts.
So I had a purpose there.
purpose here, a purpose with freedom, was to explain how the Emancipation Proclamation came about, and to use a fictional method which allows you to get inside the minds of the participants, which you cannot really do as a straight historian.
And in David Donald's new one volume,
biography of Lincoln, the one that's coming out next month.
You know, this is this generation's one-volume Lincoln, replacing B.P.
Thomas'.
In the back, when he gets to the notes about the Emancipation Proclamation, he credits freedom as having an excellent underbook
has all the facts about how it came to be.
Well, how do you feel when you see that?
Damn good.
Now, in this one, people in the world of intelligence, you know, are fascinated by it, with it, because it deals with the philosophy of epistemology, and the
the techniques, the serious techniques of deception.
I know that you know that I know that you know, which means what?
How do you play it at that point?
And you get these grand strategies against each other.
And that's part of their business and part of the way they delight in their business.
And some of the feeling of dismay and horror when it goes wrong.
This premise of the sleeper with this vast fortune to play with, is this totally an invention, or is it something that you suspect may to some lesser degree have actually happened?
Well, we do know that when the Soviet Empire was crumbling, some of the Communists had control of billions of dollars in gold, and it has disappeared.
So it's somewhere, and somebody's doing something with it.
I took the idea of a sleeper agent who was a banker who could do something with it and married that truthful idea of a stake to the fictional fancy that with inside information you could run that stake up pretty high.
And the KGB did indeed have a lot of inside information
Not only about America, but they had inside information about Eastern Europe.
And they could tell you what would happen.
Well, they gave you tomorrow's newspaper today.
And if you have billions of dollars to play with, and you know what horses are going to win, and what currency is going to go up or go down as a result of political unrest, then you can really make fortunes out of it.
So I put the truth together with a speculation, and who knows how much of it is true.
What do your contacts and language tell you about this?
Is it a fanciple premise, or is it something that might have some credibility to it?
They're checking into some of it.
Are they really?
You know, the idea.
The concept.
Where is some of this money?
People in Russia and in Latvia and in Langley are interested in the Russian Mafia.
They're becoming a very powerful political force in their world right now.
Here's an answer to your question.
Two weeks ago, I get a wonderful newsletter from the Jamestown Foundation, which sort of replaced Radio Free Europe in
knowing what's going on inside Russia and inside the former Soviet Republic.
And they said that there had been two bankers a month murdered in Russia for the last two years.
Wow.
They just murdered, and they... That's 48.
That's a lot of bankers, isn't it?
That's not 48, 24.
Times two, right.
So they killed the cream of the bankers.
And why?
because the amalgam of the old underground, the new corrupt apparatchiks, and the new capitalists have gotten together to form an effective mafia.
That's true.
And what do you suppose they call themselves?
The Felix Group.
Isn't that amazing?
Yeah.
Well, it's not really amazing, because... Well, you pick Felix Dzerzhinsky as your patron saint, and so it becomes, I call it the Felix Organization, and they call it the Felix Group.
Sometimes, you know, because you know enough, you can almost... Right.
That's why I've come to the conclusion that I have a great criminal mind.
That's my kicker.
I always need my lead, and I always need my kicker.
to the story.
Being a Pulitzer Prize winning journalist, do you find that when you go into your novelist mode that you have a hard time letting your imagination run wild?
No.
The hard time with your imagination comes when you're writing political commentary.
You have to rein it in.
That's the other way with you.
I let things go.
There's a great quote in that Times magazine piece, that profile of you last day.
That was in New York magazine.
Was it New York?
It wasn't the Times.
Okay.
It was something they sent, and I thought it was the Times.
It was New York magazine.
But the quote was, you have the best job in the world.
Do you feel that way?
Oh, absolutely.
I mean, you never could have possibly imagined that at this point in your career, in your life, that you'd be doing all these wonderful things.
Having influence, being a journalist, being a novelist.
Right, and being free.
Key word, right?
Yeah, and that's the, check the opening sentence in this book.
Right.
And it comes out of the title of my Civil War novel.
And that's, freedom is a central thing in my life, both personal and interest in human rights.
How do you see yourself as a writer of political thrillers?
Do you see yourself, do you rank yourself in the pantheon, assuming that Le Carre is on Mount Everest?
I'm not a full-time spine novelist.
This is my first and maybe last spine novel.
Although you never can tell.
But I chose the genre to
served my purpose.
Which was?
To explore the mutual manipulation of spies and reporters, and to study disinformation and deception.
Is it also a comment, a post-Cold War comment in any way?
Obviously it takes place in post-Cold War,
Well, it is a commentary on the interplay of good and evil forces after the evil empire is gone.
Of course, this is a pretty interesting week, isn't it?
Progress reconvenes.
These are exciting times to change hats entirely now.
Right.
And my vacation is over as of tomorrow, and I go back to work.
so that's why I got the papers all here, reading about Bosnia, and I'll pick up the phone and I'll call Holbrook and whoever else and get to work tomorrow.
I also have an interesting year ahead, or nine years ahead on novels.
I'm on the Pulitzer board now, and so I get a chance to read all the novels of the
chosen by the panels for consideration as the Pulitzer Prize novel.
Novels, though?
No, on all categories, novels, poetry, newspaper, everything.
The board is 12 people who vote on the submissions.
That'll be fun.
So now I'm going to start reading a lot more novels.
You get a lot of books, though.
They'll send you a lot of books.
I get a lot of books, anyway.
But now I'll be reading them more closely and purposefully.
Just quickly, Ace McFarland, your big literary agent, are you making any comment on the super-agents that you might know?
Well, there's no doubt anybody who's been to Mort's office knows that I've described Mort's office, but the agent herein is not Mort.
I've heard that you don't hold grudges, I guess, for a particular... There's a statute of limitations.
Yeah.
I remember William Kennedy, when he won for Irony, one of my favorite authors, said he quoted Billy Phelan or Franny Phelan.
He says, I don't hold grudges for five after five years.
But it is kind of amusing to look at that Halberstadt quote when you were first at that position in New York Times.
And he later... Did he recant that?
He sent me a note about that, saying,
I bet he was wrong, and he admitted it.
And you and Kissinger, I understand, are kind of... And Bette Brown, yeah.
Oh, yeah.
Henry and I buried the hatchet ten years ago.
So, life goes on.
And Bert Lance, whenever he comes up to Washington, I got my Pulitzer on his back.
But you also had the decency to pull back the...
Yeah, I hate to say the dogs.
Well, I kick them when they're up.
It's important, isn't it?
Yeah, a very important distinction.
I think, and you also said that writing three columns a week is not a full-time job.
That's true.
And is that, can you just, what do you do for the rest of the week?
I mean, it's seen.
Man, my kids are out of the house, right?
The dogs take up a certain amount of time, but you can write while you're walking then, right?
Would you like me to send you a copy of my piece to your office or wherever?
Gee, that'd be great.
I'd be pleased to do that.
And I'm just going to, do you mind if I also take a couple of shots?
What was that we were just saying?
You shot that famous picture in Moscow, right?
Right, of Nixon putting his finger in the chest of Khrushchev and saying, your children will live in freedom.
When Khrushchev said, your children will
You know who won that one, huh?
Right.
Well, the KGB won the espionage war, but we won the Cold War.
One more, and I'll be out of here.
One more.
Well, you're a one-man band.
It's great to see you.
Amazing.
At my age to be doing this stuff.